feat(notifications): a chime when something arrives, and email for the events that matter

Human request 2026-08-22: "เพิ่มเสียงการแจ้งเตือน แบบการแจ้งเตือนอื่นๆ พร้อมส่ง
email แจ้งเตือนให้กับ Agent".

── 1. THE SOUND NEEDED SOMETHING TO SOUND FOR ──

The unread badge was fetched exactly once, on mount. It could sit at 0 for an
entire working day while notifications piled up server-side. A chime bolted
onto that would have been a chime that only ever fires on page refresh: built,
demoable, useless.

So the store polls. One GET returning a single integer, once a minute, paused
while the tab is hidden and refreshed the moment it comes back. A websocket is
the better answer eventually — it is also a broker, a daemon, socket auth and
a reconnect story; this costs about a kilobyte an hour per open tab and no new
infrastructure. Right trade for a badge, wrong trade for a chat.

The chime watches `arrivals`, NOT `unreadCount`. The two diverge constantly:
reading a notification on a phone LOWERS the count, and a genuinely new one
that merely restores the previous number would be silent under a count
watcher. `arrivals` only counts up, and the first reading of a session
establishes a baseline rather than announcing three-day-old items as though
they had just landed.

Web Audio, not an .mp3: a build asset, a request, a cache entry and a content
hash for ~300ms of two sine tones is a bad deal, and a synthesised tone cannot
404 on a stale deploy. Autoplay is the hard part, not the sound — the context
is created lazily on first play (a suspended context made at boot stays
suspended in Safari), resume() is attempted every time, and every failure path
is a silent no-op because this fires on a 60-second timer.

The mute ships WITH the sound, in the bell itself, because the moment somebody
wants it off is the moment it just went off. Stored per-device in
localStorage: the same person may want it on at their desk and off on the
phone they carry into meetings.

── 2. EMAIL, WITHOUT DEPENDING ON INFRASTRUCTURE THAT MAY NOT BE RUNNING ──

Two constraints this codebase already learned the hard way:

  * NO QUEUE WORKER IS GUARANTEED. NewAgentRegistrationNotification's docblock
    records the 2026-08-17 fix — with QUEUE_CONNECTION=database and no
    `queue:work`, a ShouldQueue notification inserts a `jobs` row and returns.
    No mail, no error, nothing to look at.
  * AN ANNOUNCEMENT IS N RECIPIENTS. AnnouncementService loops over every
    targeted agent inside the admin's POST. One SMTP round-trip each is a
    request that times out on any company big enough to matter — with the
    announcement already saved.

So delivery splits by shape, not by convenience:

  SINGLE-RECIPIENT events (approved, rejected, commission paid, payment
  confirmed) send INLINE, via DB::afterCommit. One round-trip on a request
  that already exists. No queue, no cron. These are the mails an agent is
  actually waiting on, and their blast radius is zero infrastructure.

  ANNOUNCEMENTS are stamped email_due_at and swept by
  `notifications:send-emails` every five minutes, in bounded batches.

That split is the point: if the scheduler is not running — and routes/console.php
notes a real cron entry is still a hosting to-do — announcements degrade to
in-app only, and everything urgent still sends. A missing cron cannot take
every email down.

afterCommit and not a bare send(): OrderService::confirmPayment() calls
notify() INSIDE the transaction that writes the order and the commission
ledger. Sending there would hold row locks open across a network round-trip on
the hottest write path, and a later rollback would have already told the agent
their money was paid when the ledger row no longer exists.

NotificationMailer catches Throwable, and that is the safe behaviour rather
than the lazy one: the commission WAS paid, the agent WAS approved. If SMTP is
down the right outcome is "no email", never "the payout failed". It is safe
only because the failure is recorded — attempts increment, the reason is
logged with the row id, email_due_at stays set for retry. `emailed_at` is
stamped BEFORE the send, so a crash mid-send loses one email rather than
mailing somebody 288 times a day and getting the sending domain blacklisted.

WHICH EVENTS: approval_status, commission_paid, order_payment_confirmed,
announcement. NOT exam_passed/exam_failed — those fire from the agent's own
submit request, so the score is on their screen at the moment the mail would
send; emailing it is spam, and spam is how a sender ends up filtered, taking
the approval and payment mail with it. NOT follow_up_due, which already has
its own richer mail. In config/notifications.php rather than buried in a
service — a step better than hardcoding, a step short of the admin screen BR-7
ultimately wants. Flagged below, not silently called done.

AN OFF SWITCH SHIPS IN THE SAME CHANGE. Email an agent cannot stop is not a
feature; the first person who does not want it filters the sender and silently
loses the mails that mattered. users.email_notifications_enabled, defaulting
true, with a switch in Profile and PUT /me/notification-preferences. Checked
both at write time AND at send time, because a deferred announcement can sit
for minutes and somebody who switched it off in that window must not receive
the one already in flight.

── TESTS ──

33 new cases: 17 backend (NotificationEmailTest), 11 store polling, 6 sound,
plus 3 added to the bell spec.

Mutation-checked, eight ways — each one a change that looks like an
improvement and breaks the feature silently:
  ShouldQueue on the mail                    → 1 fails
  announcements no longer deferred           → 2 fail
  mailer's exactly-once guard removed        → 1 fails
  opt-out ignored at send time               → 1 fails
  arrivals derived from any count change     → 3 fail
  visibility guard removed from polling      → 3 fail
  mute ignored                               → 1 fails
  chime unwired from the bell                → 1 fails

The exactly-once mutation initially SURVIVED — the test was pinning the
sweep's whereNull query, not the mailer's guard. Test added
(test_the_mailer_itself_refuses_an_already_sent_row) and the mutation now
fails it. Recorded here because a mutation check that finds nothing is worth
less than one that finds this.

Full suites green — backend 1789 passed (6589 assertions), frontend 263
passed. vue-tsc, eslint and pint clean.

── STILL NEEDED ON THE SERVER ──

  php artisan migrate                (2 new migrations)
  a cron entry: * * * * * php artisan schedule:run
     Without it: announcement emails and retries never send, and
     DispatchDueFollowUpReminders — already scheduled since TASK-016 — has
     never run either. Everything urgent still emails without it.
  MAIL_MAILER is `log` in .env.example; production needs real SMTP.

Deferred, not done: an admin screen for the per-company "which events email"
setting (BR-7); a digest so a company publishing several announcements a day
does not send several mails; websocket push in place of polling.

Co-Authored-By: Claude Opus 5 <noreply@anthropic.com>
Claude-Session: https://claude.ai/code/session_0136fjw31bVdmJ41crFhLtM8
